```
LIP: 0044
Title: Introduce Validators module
Author: Alessandro Ricottone <alessandro.ricottone@lightcurve.io>
        Andreas Kendziorra <andreas.kendziorra@lightcurve.io>
        Rishi Mittal <rishi.mittal@lightcurve.io>
Discussions-To: https://research.lisk.com/t/introduce-validators-module/317
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 2021-08-06
Updated: 2022-05-10
Requires: 0040
```

## Abstract

The Validators module is responsible for validating the eligibility of a validator for generating a block and the block signature. Furthermore, it maintains information about the registered validators in its module store and provides the generator list. In this LIP, we specify the properties of the Validators module, along with their serialization and default values. Furthermore, we specify the state transitions logic defined within this module, i.e. the protocol logic injected during the block processing and the functions that can be called from other modules or off-chain services.

## Copyright

This LIP is licensed under the [Creative Commons Zero 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

## Motivation

Validators in Lisk DPoS and Lisk PoA chains share many common properties, like the generator and BLS keys. It is therefore desirable to handle these properties and their associated logic in a single module, the Validators module.

The Validators module handles parts of the block validation. In particular, it verifies that a validator is eligible for generating a block in a certain block slot and the validity of the block signature. Furthermore, it maintains the generator and BLS keys of all registered validators in its store and exposes functions to register new keys during a validator registration, to update the generator key, and to get the list of current validators (the generator list).

In this LIP we specify the properties, serialization, and initialization of the Validators module, as well as the protocol logic processed during a block processing and the functions exposed to other modules and to off-chain services.

## Rationale

### Generator Key

To be able to create block signatures, the secret key of the validator account needs to be accessible for a generator node. The most common approach is to store the encrypted passphrase that yields the secret key (or the encrypted secret key) on the node, where the encryption key is derived from a password-based key derivation function. This results in a small security risk: If an attacker is able to get the encrypted passphrase (or encrypted secret key) and the password for the encryption key derivation, the attacker has full control over the validator account. This may be a bigger concern for validators running a Lisk node on a remote data center.

To mitigate this risk, we propose to add an extra key pair to a validator account that is used for creating block signatures. Then, a generator node only requires access to the secret generator key, but not to the secret that is used for signing transactions. To increase security even further, validators should be able to update the generator key pair at any time. This is done by calling the `setValidatorGeneratorKey` function, described [below](#setValidatorGeneratorKey).

### Ensuring Uniqueness of validator BLS Keys

The Validators module store maintains an account for each validator registered in the chain. In particular, it stores the [BLS key](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0038.md) associated with the validator, used to sign commits. BLS keys have to be unique across the chain, i.e. two validators are not allowed to register the same BLS key. To easily check whether a BLS key has been previously registered, we use a _registered BLS keys substore_, to store all the registered validator BLS keys. Store keys are set to the BLS key and the corresponding store value to the address of the validator that registered the key. This allows to check for the existence of a certain BLS key in constant time.

### Block Slots

In the Lisk protocol, time is divided into intervals of fixed length. These intervals are called _block slots_ and at most one block can be added to the blockchain during each slot. The length of a block slot is a constant called _block time_. The validator module provides the functions to calculate the block slot given the timestamp and viceversa.

Furthermore, the validators module maintains the _generator list_, an array of addresses corresponding to the accounts that are eligible to generate a block in the current round. Note that a position in the generator list does NOT reflect the position in a round. For example, when the DPoS module in a DPoS chain provides a generator list `generatorList` via the function [setGeneratorList](#setgeneratorlist), then `generatorList[0]` does not necessarily represent the first generator of the round. Instead, `generatorList[n]` does represent the first generator of the round for an integer `n` with `0 < n < length(generatorList)`, where `n` depends on the number of missed block slots in the past. The block slots of a round are then assigned round-robin using `[generatorList[n], generatorList[n+1], ..., generatorList[-1], generatorList[0], ..., generatorList[n-1]]`. The exact assignment of a generator for a timestamp is defined by the function [getGeneratorAtTimestamp](#getgeneratorattimestamp).

## Specification

In this section, we specify the substores that are part of the Validators module store and the protocol logic called during the block processing. The Validators module has module ID `MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS` (see the [table below](#notation-and-constants)).

### Notation and Constants

We define the following constants:

Name                           | Type    | Value                                                | Description
------------------------------ | ------- | ---------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
`MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS`         | bytes   | TBD                                                  | ID of the Validators module.
`STORE_PREFIX_VALIDATORS_DATA` | bytes   | 0x0000                                               | Store prefix of the validators data substore.
`STORE_PREFIX_GENERATOR_LIST`  | bytes   | 0x4000                                               | Store prefix of the generator list substore.
`STORE_PREFIX_BLS_KEYS`        | bytes   | 0x8000                                               | Store prefix of the registered BLS keys substore.
`STORE_PREFIX_GENESIS_DATA`    | bytes   | 0xc000                                               | Store prefix of the genesis data substore.
`INVALID_BLS_KEY`              | bytes   | 48 bytes all set to 0x00                             | An invalid BLS key, used as a placeholder before a valid BLS key is registered.
`BLOCK_TIME`                   | integer | 10 (value for the Lisk mainchain)                    | Block time (in seconds) set in the chain configuration.
`MAINCHAIN_ID`                 | bytes   | Value is specified in [LIP 0045][lip-0045#constants] | The chain ID of the mainchain as part of the interoperability module.
`TYPE_ID_GENERATOR_KEY_REGISTRATION` | bytes   | 0x0001      | Type ID of the generator key registration event. |
`TYPE_ID_BLS_KEY_REGISTRATION` | bytes   | 0x0002      | Type ID of the BLS key registration event. |
`KEY_REG_RESULT_SUCCESS` | uint32   | 0      | Success result code of key registration events. |
`KEY_REG_RESULT_NO_VALIDATOR` | uint32   | 1      | Failure result code of key registration events: address not registered as validator. |
`KEY_REG_RESULT_ALREADY_VALIDATOR` | uint32   | 2      | Failure result code of key registration events: address already registered as validator. |
`KEY_REG_RESULT_NO_MAINCHAIN` | uint32   | 3      | Failure result code of key registration events: chain is not the mainchain. |
`KEY_REG_RESULT_DUPLICATE_BLS_KEY` | uint32   | 4      | Failure result code of key registration events: BLS key already registered in the chain. |
`KEY_REG_RESULT_NO_UPDATE_BLS_KEY` | uint32   | 5      | Failure result code of key registration events: BLS keys cannot be updated. |
`KEY_REG_RESULT_INVALID_POP` | uint32   | 6      | Failure result code of key registration events: invalid proof of possession. |
`ADDRESS_LENGTH`                     | uint32  | 20      | Length in bytes of type `Address`. |
`ED25519_PUBLIC_KEY_LENGTH`          | uint32  | 32      | Length in bytes of type `PublicKeyEd25519`. |
`BLS_KEY_LENGTH`          | uint32  | 48      | Length in bytes of type `BLSKey`. |
`BLS_POP_LENGTH`          | uint32  | 96      | Length in bytes of type `ProofOfPossession`. |

### Type Definition

| Name               | Type    | Validation            | Description                     |
|--------------------|---------|-----------------------|---------------------------------|
| `Address` | bytes   | Must be of length `ADDRESS_LENGTH`. | Address of an account.   |
| `PublicKeyEd25519` | bytes | Must be of length `ED25519_PUBLIC_KEY_LENGTH`. | Used for Ed25519 public keys. |
| `BLSKey` | bytes | Must be of length `BLS_KEY_LENGTH`. | Used for BLS keys. |
| `ProofOfPossession` | bytes | Must be of length `BLS_POP_LENGTH`. | [The proof of possession associated with a BLS key][lip-0038#public-key-registration]. |

### Validators Module Store

The key-value pairs in the module store are organized in the following substores.

#### Validators Data Substore

##### Store Prefix, Store Key, and Store Value

* The store prefix is set to `STORE_PREFIX_VALIDATORS_DATA`.
* Store keys are set to `ADDRESS_LENGTH` bytes addresses, representing a user address.
* Store values are set to _validator account_ data structures, holding the properties indicated [below](#properties-and-default-values), serialized using the JSON schema `validatorAccountSchema`, presented [below](#json-schema).
* Notation: For the rest of this proposal let `validatorAccount(address)` be an entry in the validators data substore identified by the store key `address`.

##### JSON Schema

```java
validatorAccountSchema = {
  "type": "object",
  "required": ["generatorKey", "blsKey"],
  "properties": {
    "generatorKey": {
      "dataType": "bytes",
      "length": 32,
      "fieldNumber": 1
    },
    "blsKey": {
      "dataType": "bytes",
      "length": 48,
      "fieldNumber": 2
    }
  }
}
```

##### Properties and Default values

The validator account holds the generator and BLS keys of a registered validator. In this section, we describe the properties of a validator account. These properties are set by the `registerValidatorKeys` function, called for instance during the processing of the [delegate registration command][lip-0057] or the [authority registration command][lip-0047].

* `generatorKey`: The public key whose corresponding private key is used to sign blocks generated by the validator. A valid generator key is 32 bytes long.
* `blsKey`: The validator BLS key is the public BLS key whose corresponding private key is used to sign certificates. A valid BLS key is 48 bytes long.

#### Generator List Substore

##### Store Prefix, Store Key, and Store Value

* The store prefix is set to `STORE_PREFIX_GENERATOR_LIST`.
* The store key is set to empty bytes.
* The store value is set to the _generator list_ data structure, serialized using the JSON schema `generatorListSchema`, presented [below](#json-schema-1).
* Notation: For the rest of this proposal let `generatorList` be the entry in the generator list substore.

##### JSON Schema

```java
generatorListSchema = {
  "type": "object",
  "required": ["addresses"],
  "properties": {
    "addresses": {
      "type": "array",
      "fieldNumber": 1,
      "items": {
        "dataType": "bytes"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

##### Properties and Default values

This substore stores an array of `Address` values, corresponding to the list of eligible generators for the current round. Note that a position in the generator list does NOT reflect the position in a round. The assignment of a generator for a block slot is defined by the function [getGeneratorAtTimestamp](#getgeneratorattimestamp).

#### Registered BLS Keys Substore

##### Store Prefix, Store Key, and Store Value

* The store prefix is set to `STORE_PREFIX_BLS_KEYS`.
* Store keys are set to 48 bytes BLS keys.
* Store values are set to the addresses of the validators corresponding to the store keys, serialized using the `validatorAddressSchema` schema presented [below](#json-schema-2).

##### JSON Schema

```java
validatorAddressSchema = {
  "type": "object",
  "required": ["address"],
  "properties": {
    "address": {
      "dataType": "bytes",
      "length": ADDRESS_LENGTH,
      "fieldNumber": 1
    }
  }
}
```

##### Properties and Default values

The registered BLS keys substore maintains all registered validator BLS keys, using the BLS key as store key and the address of the validator that registered the BLS key as the corresponding store value. The registered BLS keys substore is initially empty, i.e. it does not contain any key-value pairs.

#### Genesis Data Substore

##### Store Prefix, Store Key, and Store Value

* The store prefix is set to `STORE_PREFIX_GENESIS_DATA`.
* The store key is set to empty bytes.
* The store value is set to a data structure holding values from the genesis block of the chain, serialized using the `genesisDataSchema` schema presented [below](#json-schema-3).
* Notation: For the rest of this proposal let `genesisData` be the entry in the genesis data substore.

##### JSON Schema

```java
genesisDataSchema = {
  "type": "object",
  "required": ["timestamp"],
  "properties": {
    "timestamp": {
      "dataType": "uint32",
      "fieldNumber": 1
    }
  }
}
```

##### Properties and Default values

The genesis data substore stores the timestamp of the genesis block.

### Events

#### GeneratorKeyRegistration

This event has `typeID = TYPE_ID_GENERATOR_KEY_REGISTRATION`.
This event is emitted when a generator key is registered.

##### Topics

* `address`: The address for which the generator key has been registered.

##### Data

```java
generatorKeyRegDataSchema = {
    "type": "object",
    "required": ["generatorKey", "result"],
    "properties": {
        "generatorKey": {
            "dataType": "bytes",
            "length" : 32,
            "fieldNumber": 1
        },
        "result": {
            "dataType": "uint32",
            "fieldNumber": 2
        }
    }
}
```

#### BLSKeyRegistration

This event has `typeID = TYPE_ID_BLS_KEY_REGISTRATION`.
This event is emitted when a BLS key is registered.

##### Topics

* `address`: The address for which the BLS key has been registered.

##### Data

```java
blsKeyRegDataSchema = {
    "type": "object",
    "required": ["blsKey", "result"],
    "properties": {
        "blsKey": {
            "dataType": "bytes",
            "length" : 48,
            "fieldNumber": 1
        },
        "result": {
            "dataType": "uint32",
            "fieldNumber": 2
        }
    }
}
```

### Commands

The Validators module does not specify any commands.

### Protocol Logic for Other Modules

#### registerValidatorKeys

This function creates a new validator account in the validators data substore. It is called as part of the [delegate registration][lip-0057] and [authority registration][lip-0047] commands that are part of the DPoS and PoA module.
It checks that there is no account already registered for the input `validatorAddress`, that the input BLS key `blsKey` has not been registered before in the chain, and that the input proof of possession `proofOfPossession` for the BLS key is valid. Finally, it creates a new validator account in the validators data substore and sets its generator key to the input `generatorKey`.

```python
def registerValidatorKeys(validatorAddress: Address, proofOfPossession: ProofOfPossession, generatorKey: PublicKeyEd25519, blsKey: BLSKey) -> None:
    if there exists an entry in the validators data substore with storeKey == validatorAddress:
        emitPersistentEvent(
            moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
            typeID = TYPE_ID_GENERATOR_KEY_REGISTRATION,
            data = encode(
                schema = generatorKey,
                object = {
                    "generatorKey": generatorKey,
                    "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_NO_VALIDATOR
                }
            ),
            topics=[validatorAddress]
        )
        raise Exception('This address is already registered as validator.')
    if there exists an entry in the registered BLS keys substore with storeKey == blsKey:
        emitPersistentEvent(
            moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
            typeID = TYPE_ID_BLS_KEY_REGISTRATION,
            data = encode(
                schema = blsKeyRegDataSchema,
                object = {
                    "blsKey": blsKey,
                    "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_DUPLICATE_BLS_KEY
                }
            ),
            topics=[validatorAddress]
        )
        raise Exception('This address already registered a BLS key.')
    if PopVerify(blsKey, proofOfPossession) != VALID:
        emitPersistentEvent(
            moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
            typeID = TYPE_ID_BLS_KEY_REGISTRATION,
            data = encode(
                schema = blsKeyRegDataSchema,
                object = {
                    "blsKey": blsKey,
                    "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_INVALID_POP
                }
            ),
            topics=[validatorAddress]
        )
        raise Exception('Invalid proof of possession for the given BLS key.')

    validatorAccount = {
        generatorKey: generatorKey,
        blsKey: blsKey,
    }
    create an entry in the validators data substore with storeKey = validatorAddress and storeValue = validatorAccount
    create an entry in the registered BLS keys data substore with storeKey = blsKey and storeValue = validatorAddress
    emitEvent(
        moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
        typeID = TYPE_ID_GENERATOR_KEY_REGISTRATION,
        data = encode(
            schema = generatorKeyRegDataSchema,
            object = {
                "generatorKey": generatorKey,
                "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_SUCCESS
            }
        ),
        topics=[validatorAddress]
    )
    emitEvent(
        moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
        typeID = TYPE_ID_BLS_KEY_REGISTRATION,
        data = encode(
            schema = blsKeyRegDataSchema,
            object = {
                "blsKey": blsKey,
                "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_SUCCESS
            }
        ),
        topics=[validatorAddress]
    )
```

The function [`PopVerify`][bls-specs-v4-popverify] is part of the [BLS signature scheme][lip-0038#public-key-registration].

#### registerValidatorWithoutBLSKey

This function creates a new validator account in the validators data substore, where the `blsKey` is set to `INVALID_BLS_KEY`. It is called as part of the [genesis block processing of the DPoS module][lip-0057] for the snapshot block used for the migration from Lisk Core 3 to Lisk Core 4. It should not be called on any other chain nor for any other block.
It checks that there is no account already registered for the input `validatorAddress`. Then, it creates a new validator account in the validators data substore, with `blsKey` set to `INVALID_BLS_KEY` and the generator key set to the input `generatorKey`. If this function is called on a chain that is not the mainchain, then this registration fails.

```python
def registerValidatorWithoutBLSKey(validatorAddress: Address, generatorKey: PublicKeyEd25519) -> None:
    # If the chain is not the mainchain, let the registration fail
    if the chain is not the mainchain:
        emitPersistentEvent(
            moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
            typeID = TYPE_ID_GENERATOR_KEY_REGISTRATION,
            data = encode(
                schema = generatorKey,
                object = {
                    "generatorKey": generatorKey,
                    "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_NO_MAINCHAIN
                }
            ),
            topics=[validatorAddress]
        )
        raise Exception('A validator can be registered without a BLS key only on the mainchain.')

    if there exists an entry in the validators data substore with storeKey == validatorAddress:
        emitPersistentEvent(
            moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
            typeID = TYPE_ID_GENERATOR_KEY_REGISTRATION,
            data = encode(
                schema = generatorKey,
                object = {
                    "generatorKey": generatorKey,
                    "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_ALREADY_VALIDATOR
                }
            ),
            topics=[validatorAddress]
        )
        raise Exception('This address is already registered as validator.')

    validatorAccount = {
        generatorKey: generatorKey,
        blsKey: INVALID_BLS_KEY,
    }
    create an entry in the validators data substore with storeKey = validatorAddress and storeValue = validatorAccount
    emitEvent(
        moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
        typeID = TYPE_ID_GENERATOR_KEY_REGISTRATION,
        data = encode(
            schema = generatorKeyRegDataSchema,
            object = {
                "generatorKey": generatorKey,
                "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_SUCCESS
            }
        ),
        topics=[validatorAddress]
    )
```

#### getValidatorAccount

This function is used to retrieve information about a validator account.

##### Parameters

* `address`: Address identifying the validator account.

##### Returns

This function returns the validator account corresponding to the input address.

##### Execution

This function returns `validatorAccount(address: Address)`. If there is no entry corresponding to `address`, it returns an empty object.

#### getGenesisData

This function is used to retrieve information about the genesis data.

##### Parameters

This function has no input parameter.

##### Returns

This function returns the data structure stored in the genesis data substore.

#### setValidatorBLSKey

This function sets the BLS key of a validator account. This update is only possible if the current BLS key of the validator is equal to a predefined constant invalid BLS key.
It checks that there exists a validator account registered for the input `validatorAddress`, that the input BLS key has not been registered before in the chain, that the BLS key of the validator account is equal to a certain constant invalid BLS key, and that the input proof of possession `proofOfPossession` for the BLS key is valid. Finally, it updates the BLS key of the validator account to the input `blsKey`.

```python
def setValidatorBLSKey(validatorAddress: Address, proofOfPossession: ProofOfPossession, blsKey: BLSKey) -> None:
    if no entry in the validators data substore exist with storeKey == validatorAddress:
        emitPersistentEvent(
            moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
            typeID = TYPE_ID_BLS_KEY_REGISTRATION,
            data = encode(
                schema = blsKeyRegDataSchema,
                object = {
                    "blsKey": blsKey,
                    "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_NO_VALIDATOR
                }
            ),
            topics=[validatorAddress]
        )
        raise Exception('This address is registered as validator. Only validators can register a BLS key.')
    if there exists an entry in the registered BLS keys substore with storeKey == blsKey:
        emitPersistentEvent(
            moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
            typeID = TYPE_ID_BLS_KEY_REGISTRATION,
            data = encode(
                schema = blsKeyRegDataSchema,
                object = {
                    "blsKey": blsKey,
                    "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_DUPLICATE_BLS_KEY
                }
            ),
            topics=[validatorAddress]
        )
        raise Exception('This address is already registered as validator.')
    if validatorAccount(validatorAddress).blsKey != INVALID_BLS_KEY:
        emitPersistentEvent(
            moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
            typeID = TYPE_ID_BLS_KEY_REGISTRATION,
            data = encode(
                schema = blsKeyRegDataSchema,
                object = {
                    "blsKey": blsKey,
                    "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_NO_UPDATE_BLS_KEY
                }
            ),
            topics=[validatorAddress]
        )
        raise Exception('Only the default invalid BLS key can be updated.')
    if PopVerify(blsKey, proofOfPossession) != VALID:
        emitPersistentEvent(
            moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
            typeID = TYPE_ID_BLS_KEY_REGISTRATION,
            data = encode(
                schema = blsKeyRegDataSchema,
                object = {
                    "blsKey": blsKey,
                    "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_INVALID_POP
                }
            ),
            topics=[validatorAddress]
        )
        raise Exception('Invalid proof of possession for the given BLS key.')

    validatorAccount(validatorAddress).blsKey = blsKey
    create an entry in the registered BLS keys data substore with storeKey = blsKey and storeValue = validatorAddress
    emitEvent(
        moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
        typeID = TYPE_ID_BLS_KEY_REGISTRATION,
        data = encode(
            schema = blsKeyRegDataSchema,
            object = {
                "blsKey": blsKey,
                "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_SUCCESS
            }
        ),
        topics=[validatorAddress]
    )
```

#### setValidatorGeneratorKey

This function sets the generator key of a validator account.
It checks that there exists a validator account registered for the input `validatorAddress` and then updates the generator key to the input `generatorKey`.

```python
def setValidatorGeneratorKey(validatorAddress: Address, generatorKey: PublicKeyEd25519) -> None:
    if no entry in the validators data substore exist with storeKey == validatorAddress:
        emitPersistentEvent(
            moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
            typeID = TYPE_ID_GENERATOR_KEY_REGISTRATION,
            data = encode(
                schema = generatorKey,
                object = {
                    "generatorKey": generatorKey,
                    "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_NO_VALIDATOR
                }
            ),
            topics=[validatorAddress]
        )
        raise Exception('This address is registered as validator. Only validators can register a generator key.')

    validatorAccount(validatorAddress).generatorKey = generatorKey

    emitEvent(
        moduleID = MODULE_ID_VALIDATORS,
        typeID = TYPE_ID_GENERATOR_KEY_REGISTRATION,
        data = encode(
            schema = generatorKeyRegDataSchema,
            object = {
                "generatorKey": generatorKey,
                "result": KEY_REG_RESULT_SUCCESS
            }
        ),
        topics=[validatorAddress]
    )
```

#### getAddressFromBLSKey

This function returns the address that registered the input BLS key.

##### Parameters

`blsKey`: A 48 bytes value corresponding to a BLS key.

##### Returns

This function returns a 20 bytes address.

##### Execution

This function checks if an entry with store key equal to  `blsKey` exists in the registered BLS keys substore. If this is the case, it returns the stored `address`, else it returns an error.

#### getGeneratorList

This function returns the current generator list.

##### Parameters

This function has no input parameter.

##### Returns

This function returns the current generator list.

##### Execution

This function returns `generatorList`.

#### getSlotNumber

This function returns the slot number corresponding to the input timestamp.

```python
def getSlotNumber(timestamp: uint32) -> uint32:
    if timestamp < genesisData.timestamp:
        raise Exception('Input timestamp cannot be smaller than genesis block timestamp.')
    elapsedTime = timestamp - genesisData.timestamp
    return floor(elapsedTime / BLOCK_TIME)
```

#### getSlotTime

This function returns the slot time corresponding to the input slot number.

```python
def getSlotTime(slotNumber: uint32) -> uint32:
    slotGenesisTimeOffset = slotNumber * BLOCK_TIME
    return genesisData.timestamp + slotGenesisTimeOffset
```

#### getGeneratorAtTimestamp

This function returns the address of the generator active at the input timestamp. Notice that if the input timestamp corresponds to a time slot before or after the current round, this function may not return the correct generator address.

```python
def getGeneratorAtTimestamp(timestamp: uint32) -> Address:
    elapsedTime = timestamp - genesisData.timestamp
    slotIndex = floor(elapsedTime / BLOCK_TIME) % generatorList.addresses.length
    return generatorList.addresses[slotIndex]
```

#### getGeneratorsBetweenTimestamps

This function returns the addresses of the generators active between the two input timestamps and the number of block slots assigned to them. The slots corresponding to the input timestamps are NOT counted, only the slots in between. Notice that for all counted slots, the current `generatorList` must be the used generator list. Otherwise, the behaviour is undefined. It’s the calling module’s responsibility to ensure that.

```python
def getGeneratorsBetweenTimestamps(startTimestamp: uint32, endTimestamp: uint32) -> dict[Address, uint32]:
    if endTimestamp < startTimestamp:
        raise Exception('End timestamp cannot be smaller than start timestamp.')
    
    if startTimestamp < genesisData.timestamp:
        raise Exception('Start timestamp cannot be smaller than genesis block timestamp.')

    result = {}

    startSlotNumber = floor((startTimestamp - genesisData.timestamp) / BLOCK_TIME) + 1
    endSlotNumber = floor((endTimestamp - genesisData.timestamp) / BLOCK_TIME) - 1

    if startSlotNumber > endSlotNumber:
        return result

    totalSlots = endSlotNumber - startSlotNumber + 1

    # Quick skip to directly assign many block slots to every generator in the list
    baseSlots = floor(totalSlots / generatorList.addresses.length)
    if baseSlots > 0:
        totalSlots -= baseSlots * generatorList.addresses.length
        for generatorAddress in generatorList.addresses:
            result[generatorAddress] = baseSlots

    # Assign remaining block slots
    for slotNumber in range(startSlotNumber, startSlotNumber + totalSlots):
        slotIndex = slotNumber % generatorList.addresses.length
        generatorAddress = generatorList.addresses[slotIndex]
        if generatorAddress in result:
            result[generatorAddress] += 1
        else:
            result[generatorAddress] = 1

    return result
```

#### setGeneratorList

This function updates the value of the generator list.

##### Parameters

* `generatorAddresses: list[Address]`: An array of 20 bytes values.

##### Returns

This function returns a boolean indicating the successful update of the generator list.

##### Execution

This function checks if all elements of `generatorAddresses` have a registered validator account in the validators data substore. If this is not the case, it returns false. Otherwise, it updates the value of `generatorList.addresses` to `generatorAddresses` and returns true.

### Endpoints for Off-Chain Services

#### getGeneratorList

This function returns the current generator list.

##### Parameters

This function has no input parameter.

##### Returns

This function returns the current generator list.

##### Execution

This function returns `generatorList`.

#### verifyBLSKey

This function checks that the input BLS key `blsKey` has not been registered before in the chain and that the proof of possession `proofOfPossession` for the BLS key is valid.

```python
def verifyBLSKey(proofOfPossession: ProofOfPossession, blsKey: BLSKey) -> bool:
    if there exists an entry in the registered BLS keys substore with storeKey == blsKey:
        return False

    if PopVerify(blsKey, proofOfPossession) != VALID:
        return False

    return True
```

### Genesis Block Processing

#### Genesis State Initialization

After the genesis block `b` is executed, the following logic is executed:

* Create the entry in the genesis data substore, setting `genesisData.timestamp` to `b.header.timestamp`.

#### Genesis State Finalization

The Validators module does not execute any logic during the genesis state finalization.

## Backwards Compatibility

This LIP defines a new module and specify its store, which in turn will become part of the state tree and will be authenticated by the state root. As such, it will induce a hardfork.

## Reference Implementation

TBA

[bls-specs-v4-popverify]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-irtf-cfrg-bls-signature-04#section-3.3.3
[lip-0038#public-key-registration]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0038.md#public-key-registration-and-proof-of-possession
[lip-0045#constants]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0045.md#notation-and-constants
[lip-0047]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0047.md
[lip-0057]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0057.md
