```
LIP: 0065
Title: Introduce events and add events root to block headers
Author: Alessandro Ricottone <alessandro.ricottone@lightcurve.io>
        Mehmet Egemen Albayrak <mehmet.albayrak@lightcurve.io>
Discussions-To: https://research.lisk.com/t/introduce-events-and-add-events-root-to-block-headers/342
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 2022-05-03
Updated: 2023-01-10
Requires: 0039, 0055
```

## Abstract

In this LIP, we introduce a mechanism to emit events from the application domain during the block processing. These events are included in a sparse Merkle tree, whose root, the event root, is added as a new property to block headers. Using the event root, it is possible to provide inclusion or non-inclusion proofs for events, proving whether an event was emitted during the block processing.

## Copyright

This LIP is licensed under the [Creative Commons Zero 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

## Motivation

Currently in the Lisk protocol, once a transaction has been included in a block, its effect is completely determined by the data inside of it. However, there are several cases in which this may not be the case anymore:

* The result of advanced transactions might depend on the state at the moment of execution, e.g. the conversion rate at which a swap in a DEX is executed, and cannot be read only from the transaction data.
* In the Lisk interoperability solution the effect of a [cross-chain message][lip-0049] that is part of a [cross-chain update][lip-0053] included in a block, does not necessarily depend only on its data: In some cases, the cross-chain message can be returned or its execution can fail.
* After the implementation of [LIP 0055][lip-0055#failing], transactions can fail, i.e. their execution can trigger an error but the transaction is still included in the block.

Furthermore, some state transitions, like assigning the [block reward][lip-0042] to the block generator, are not induced by transactions but [by the block header itself][lip-0055#separation]. In all these scenarios, the extra information about the execution of state transitions can be included in _events_, on-chain data emitted during the processing of a block. Front-end products can query the blockchain for the existence of a certain event and use the information contained to enrich the user experience.

Events do not need to be explicitly included in the block (like, e.g., transactions), but can be rather authenticated collectively in the block header. This authentication mechanism can be used to ensure that a specific event has been emitted during the block processing, e.g. it can prove a cross-chain payment has been processed successfully.

## Rationale

### Event Data Structure

Events follow a generic structure, storing the module and the event names along with a nested data property. Every module defines its events and the schemas used to serialize and deserialize the data property. The only restriction, which is globally imposed, is a maximum size of serialized events. This is to ensure that events can always be exchanged easily over the network.

Events have the following properties:

* `module`: A string indicating the module that emits the event.
* `name`: A string indicating the name of the event.
* `data`: A byte value. This property contains extra information regarding the event. Each module defines the schemas used for serialization and deserialization.
* `topics`: An array of byte values. The event is inserted in the sparse Merkle tree once for each entry in this array.
* `height`: The height of the block in which the event was emitted. Together with the `index`, it uniquely identifies an event within a blockchain.
* `index`: An integer counter (unique within a block) indicating how many events were emitted before the current one.

### Event Tree

Events are emitted during [application domain stages of the block processing][lip-0055#block-processing-stages] and are inserted in a [sparse Merkle tree][lip-0039] as new leaf nodes. The leaf values are set to the hash of the serialized events. Leaf keys are given by the concatenation of a generic byte value and an index that identifies the position in which the event was emitted during the block processing. In particular, each event specifies an array of topics (similar to the 'indexed' keyword used in [Solidity](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.11/cheatsheet.html#modifiers)). The same event is inserted multiple times in the sparse Merkle tree, once for each entry in this array. By default, the indexed topics array contains the ID of the transaction that emitted the event or a constant placeholder for events emitted during the processing of the block header. However, events emitted during the [processing of a cross-chain message][lip-0053#ccu-processing] contain the ID of the cross-chain message as default topic instead of the ID of the cross-chain update transaction that contained the cross-chain message.

This pattern allows efficient (non-)inclusion proofs for a variety of use cases, while at the same time leaving developers of custom modules the freedom to decide how to index custom events.

### Event root

In this LIP we propose to add the root of the event sparse Merkle tree to the block header to allow checking inclusion and non-inclusion of events. The root of the sparse Merkle tree is 32-bytes, therefore resulting in a limited increase of the block-header size.

### Default Event

We specify one default event which is emitted at the end of the transaction processing. This event is emitted within the application domain and has module name set to the name of the module to which the transaction belongs and a constant event type. The event data is a Boolean indicating the success of the transaction execution.

### Error Handling and Events

If an error is encountered during the processing of a transaction, the transaction fails and the state is reverted to the state snapshot taken before the command execution as defined in [LIP 0055][lip-0055#block-processing-stages]. Similarly, all events that were emitted during the command execution should be reverted. Sometimes, however, it is useful to still persist some events even in this case. When emitting an event each module specifies if it should be reverted in case of an error.

### Discarded Alternatives

We analyzed three options for authenticating events:

* Regular Merkle trees
* Sparse Merkle trees
* Bloom filters

#### Regular Merkle Trees

Regular Merkle trees are used to authenticate lists, and the order of the elements in the list matters in calculating the Merkle root. In the Lisk protocol, they are already used to authenticate transactions in the block header via the [`transactionRoot`][lip-0032].

We discarded regular Merkle trees because they do not provide the same flexibility of sparse Merkle trees in terms of non-inclusion proofs.

#### Bloom Filters

[Bloom filters](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloom_filter) are a probabilistic data structure that can efficiently check for the existence of a certain element in a set. Here efficiently means that no proof is necessary, as it is in the Merkle trees case, and a Verifier can check inclusion directly just by holding the filter value.

Bloom filters have no false negatives, meaning that if an element is not part of the set, it is indicated with certainty in the Bloom filter value. However, they do have a non-zero probability of false positives, where it is possible that the filter value mistakenly indicates inclusion of an element that is not part of the set. This false positive rate increases with the set size.

Another disadvantage is that Bloom filters are in general larger than Merkle roots (for instance, in Ethereum [the event Bloom filter has a size of 256 bytes](https://ethereum.github.io/yellowpaper/paper.pdf)).

To summarize, we chose sparse Merkle trees because:

* They offer non-inclusion proofs.
* The root is small in size.
* An inclusion proof indicates the existence of an event with certainty.

## Specification

### Constants

| Name | Type | Value | Description |
|------|------|-------|-------------|
| `MAX_EVENT_SIZE_BYTES` | integer | `16*1024` | Maximum size in bytes of a serialized event. |
| `MIN_MODULE_NAME_LENGTH` | integer | `1` | Minimum length of a module name. |
| `MAX_MODULE_NAME_LENGTH` | integer | `32` | Maximum length of a module name. |
| `MIN_EVENT_NAME_LENGTH` | integer | `1` | Minimum length of an event name. |
| `MAX_EVENT_NAME_LENGTH` | integer | `32` | Maximum length of an event name. |
| `EMPTY_HASH` | bytes | `sha256(b"")` | Hash of empty bytes. |
| `EVENT_TOPIC_INIT_GENESIS_STATE` | bytes | `0x00` | Default topic for events emitted during genesis state initialization. |
| `EVENT_TOPIC_FINALIZE_GENESIS_STATE` | bytes | `0x01` | Default topic for events emitted during genesis state finalization. |
| `EVENT_TOPIC_BEFORE_TRANSACTIONS` | bytes | `0x02` | Default topic for events emitted _before_ transactions execution. |
| `EVENT_TOPIC_AFTER_TRANSACTIONS` | bytes | `0x03` | Default topic for events emitted _after_ transactions execution. |
| `EVENT_NAME_DEFAULT` | string | `commandExecutionResult` | Name of default event emitted at the end of transaction execution. |
| `EVENT_INDEX_LENGTH_BITS` | integer | TBD | Length in bits of the index used to calculate events tree leaf keys. |
| `MAX_EVENTS_PER_BLOCK` | integer | `2^EVENT_INDEX_LENGTH_BITS` | Max number of events emitted per block. |
| `MAX_EVENT_INDEX` | integer | `2^EVENT_INDEX_LENGTH_BITS - 1` | Max value of an event index. |
| `TOPIC_HASH_LENGTH_BYTES` | integer | TBD | Output length in bytes of the hash function used to calculate events tree leaf keys. |
| `TOPIC_INDEX_LENGTH_BITS` | integer | `2` | Length in bits of the topic index used to calculate events tree leaf keys. |
| `MAX_TOPICS_PER_EVENT` | integer | `2^TOPIC_INDEX_LENGTH_BITS` | Max number of topics per event. |
| `TOTAL_INDEX_LENGTH_BYTES` | integer | `(EVENT_INDEX_LENGTH_BITS+TOPIC_INDEX_LENGTH_BITS)/8` | Length in bytes of the concatenation of the event index and the topic index. |

### Event ID

The event ID is defined as the hash of the serialize event.

```python
def eventID(event: Event) -> bytes:
    return sha256(encode(eventSchema, event))
```

### Event Data Structure

Events are serialized and deserialized using the following JSON schema.

```java
eventSchema = {
    "type": "object",
    "required": ["module", "name", "data", "topics", "height", "index"],
    "properties": {
        "module": {
            "dataType": "string",
            "minLength": MIN_MODULE_NAME_LENGTH,
            "maxLength": MAX_MODULE_NAME_LENGTH,
            "fieldNumber": 1
        },
        "name": {
            "dataType": "string",
            "minLength": MIN_EVENT_NAME_LENGTH,
            "maxLength": MAX_EVENT_NAME_LENGTH,
            "fieldNumber": 2
        },
        "data": {
            "dataType": "bytes",
            "fieldNumber": 3
        },
        "topics": {
            "type": "array",
            "fieldNumber": 4,
            "items": {
                "dataType": "bytes"
            },
            "minItems": 1,
            "maxItems": MAX_TOPICS_PER_EVENT
        },
        "height": {
            "dataType": "uint32",
            "fieldNumber": 5
        },
        "index": {
            "dataType": "uint32",
            "fieldNumber": 6,
            "maximum": MAX_EVENT_INDEX
        }
    }
}
```

The maximum size of a serialized event is `MAX_EVENT_SIZE_BYTES`.

#### `module`, `name`, and `data`

The `module` property corresponds to the module to which the event belongs. Each event has a `name` and JSON schema used to serialize and deserialize the `data` property. The `name` is a string of length at most `MAX_EVENT_NAME_LENGTH`. The value `EVENT_NAME_DEFAULT` is reserved for the default event and cannot be assigned.

Both `module` and `name` must be alphanumeric strings (lower and upper case characters allowed).

#### `topics`

The event `topics` is an array of unique byte values whose length ranges between `1` and `MAX_TOPICS_PER_EVENT`.

By default, the first topic is set to:

* the transaction ID, for events emitted during the transaction processing stages,
* the cross-chain message ID, for events emitted during the cross-chain message processing stages,
* the constant `EVENT_TOPIC_INIT_GENESIS_STATE`, for events emitted during the 'genesis state initialization' stage,
* the constant `EVENT_TOPIC_FINALIZE_GENESIS_STATE`, for events emitted during the 'genesis state finalization' stage,
* the constant `EVENT_TOPIC_BEFORE_TRANSACTIONS`, for events emitted during the 'before transactions execution' stage,
* or the constant `EVENT_TOPIC_AFTER_TRANSACTIONS`, for events emitted during the 'after transactions execution' stage.

An event emitted during transaction processing cannot have any of these default values in the `topics` array.

#### `height`

The event `height` is an integer set to the height of the block in which the event was emitted.

#### `index`

The event `index` is an integer between `0` and `MAX_EVENT_INDEX = MAX_EVENTS_PER_BLOCK - 1`, set to the number of events that were previously emitted in the same block. As a consequence, during the execution of a single block, at most `MAX_EVENTS_PER_BLOCK` events can be emitted.

### Error Handling and Events

For events emitted during the command execution, modules specify whether the event is reverted or not in case of error (i.e., whether it is included in the events tree or not). In all other application domain stages errors cannot occur in a valid block (thus, also state changes are never reverted) so that it is not necessary to specify if the event is revertible.

### Events Tree

Events are inserted into the events tree once for each entry in the event `topics` array. The leaf key is the concatenation of the hash of the element in the topics array, the event `index` converted to a binary string of length `EVENT_INDEX_LENGTH_BITS` and concatenated with the topic index of `TOPIC_INDEX_LENGTH_BITS` bits (corresponding to the entry in the `topics` array), for a total of `TOTAL_INDEX_LENGTH_BYTES` bytes. The leaf value is the SHA-256 hash of the serialization of the event properties using the `eventSchema` given above.

In summary, for each event one key-value pair is added to the events tree for each entry `topic` in the associated `event.topics` array, where:

* `key = sha256(topic)[:TOPIC_HASH_LENGTH_BYTES] + ((event.index << TOPIC_INDEX_LENGTH_BITS) + event.topics.index(topic)).to_bytes(TOTAL_INDEX_LENGTH_BYTES, byteorder="big")`
* `value = sha256(encode(eventSchema, event))`.

### Event Root

In this LIP we introduce a new block header property, `eventRoot`. The events root at a certain height `h`, `eventRoot(h)`, is the root of the sparse Merkle tree computed from all key-value pairs of all events emitted from the block at height `h` (the events tree). A block header without any events has only one empty node in the events tree therefore the event root equals the `EMPTY_HASH`.

### Default Event

Each module defines a default event indicating the result of a transaction processing, with the following properties:

* `module`: The name of the module of the command executed by the transaction.
* `name`: The constant `EVENT_NAME_DEFAULT`.
* `topics`: An array containing only the transaction ID.
* `data`: A Boolean value set to `true` if the transaction was processed successfully, `false` otherwise. The event `data` JSON schema is given below.

```java
defaultEventDataSchema = {
    "type": "object",
    "required": ["success"],
    "properties": {
        "success": {
            "dataType": "bool",
            "fieldNumber": 1
        }
    }
}
```

This event is emitted automatically for every transaction after the ["after command execution"][lip-0055#block-processing-stages] block processing stage.

### Emitting Events

We define the following notation to emit events during the block processing.

- `emitEvent(module: str, name: str, data: object, topics: list[bytes])`: emit an event and add it to the events tree as explained [above](#events-tree). The event index and the relevant default topic are added automatically. The `data` property is serialized according to the schema corresponding to the given `name`.
- `emitPersistentEvent(module: str, name: str, data: object, topics: list[bytes])`: emit an event and add it to the events tree as explained [above](#events-tree). The event index and the relevant default topic are added automatically. The `data` property is serialized according to the schema corresponding to the given `name`. If the event is emitted during the command execution stage, it is not removed from the events tree if the command execution fails. Otherwise, it works exactly as `emitEvent`.

## Backwards Compatibility

This LIP, and in general the new block header proposed in [LIP 0055][lip-0055], results in a hard fork as nodes following the proposed protocol will reject blocks according to the previous protocol, and nodes following the previous protocol will reject blocks according to the proposed protocol.

[lip-0032]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0032.md
[lip-0039]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0039.md
[lip-0042]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0042.md
[lip-0049]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0049.md
[lip-0053]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0053.md
[lip-0053#ccu-processing]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0053.md#cross-chain-update-command-processing-stages
[lip-0055]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0055.md
[lip-0055#block-processing-stages]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0055.md#block-processing-stages
[lip-0055#failing]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0055.md#failing-and-invalid-transactions
[lip-0055#separation]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0055.md#separation-between-block-header-and-block-assets
