```
LIP: 0036
Title: Introduce transaction properties moduleID and assetID
Author: Shusetsu Toda <shusetsu@lightcurve.io>
Type: Standards Track
Created: 2020-09-16
Updated: 2020-09-28
Requires: 0028
```

## Abstract

This LIP proposes to replace the `type` property in transaction objects by two new properties: `moduleID` and `assetID`. Both properties `moduleID` and `assetID` together must correspond to one unique transaction schema, transaction validation and execution logic.

## Copyright

This LIP is licensed under the [Creative Commons Zero 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

## Motivation

A unique way to identify a specific schema and execution logic of any transaction asset is required. For this purpose, the type property of a transaction is currently used to handle the identification in a generic way.

However, the new on-chain architecture implemented in Lisk SDK encapsulates multiple types of transaction assets in a module. Therefore, transaction properties that can identify the module and asset are required.

Also, further development of an application often introduces breaking changes, and a consistent way to handle the implementation is necessary. This facilitates not only future development and code maintenance but also the compatibility with third party services.

## Rationale

With the current on-chain architecture of Lisk SDK, a module contains multiple asset definitions. For example, the DPoS module contains 4 asset types which are delegate registration, delegate vote, token unlock and delegate misbehavior report.

In order to handle the routing of a transaction to a specific module of a specific asset, we define in this proposal two identifiers that will represent two new properties in the transaction object: `moduleID` and `assetID`. The property `moduleID` accounts for which module the transactions belong to and `assetID` accounts for the specific transaction asset inside the module. In particular, a tuple `(<moduleID>, <assetID>)` must uniquely correspond to one asset schema, validation and execution logic.

Moreover, `moduleID` must be greater than or equal to 2 because it is used for the field number of the account schema which is used for the corresponding module, and field number 1 is taken by the address property in the schema defined in [LIP 0030](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/master/proposals/lip-0030.md). Also, we do not use the value of `moduleID` 3 in any transaction below because it is associated with the “sequence module”, which doesn't have custom transaction assets.

The second passphrase registration, dapp registration, dapp-in and dapp-out transactions are going to be removed and are therefore not assigned a `moduleID` and `assetID`.

## Specification

The `type` property of the transaction object is replaced by `moduleID` and `assetID`, where both properties are of type uint32. The serialization of transactions with these properties is defined in [LIP 0028](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/master/proposals/lip-0028.md).

For every module, the value of its `moduleID` must be unique for one blockchain, and for every asset within the same module the value of `assetID` must be unique.

A tuple `(<moduleID>, <assetID>)` must uniquely correspond to one

- transaction schema,
- transaction validation and verification logic,
- transaction execution logic

in one blockchain. This means that for any change with respect to the three aspects above a different tuple `(<moduleID>, <assetID>)` must be used for the new transaction. Typically, the new transaction is still contained in the same module, i.e., the value of `moduleID` stays the same, and a new unique value of `assetID` is used.

The following table specifies the `moduleID` and `assetID` values for the current default modules and transactions.

| Transactions                      | Lisk Core 2.0 Type | moduleID | assetID |
| --------------------------------- | ------------------ | -------- | ------- |
| Token Transfer                    | 0                  | 2        | 0       |
| Multisignature Group Registration | 4                  | 4        | 0       |
| Delegate Registration             | 2                  | 5        | 0       |
| Delegate Vote                     | 3                  | 5        | 1       |
| Token Unlock                      |                    | 5        | 2       |
| Delegate Misbehavior Report       |                    | 5        | 3       |
| LSK Reclaim                       |                    | 1000     | 0       |
| Second passphrase                 | 9                  | Removed  |         |
| Dapp Registration                 | 5                  | Removed  |         |
| Dapp In                           | 6                  | Removed  |         |
| Dapp Out                          | 7                  | Removed  |         |

Following points should be considered;

- We will reserve the `moduleID` values up to 999 for default modules shipped with SDK.

## Backward Compatibility

The LIP introduces a hard fork because the type property of transactions in the current protocol is proposed to be replaced by two new properties, `moduleID` and `assetID`. Therefore transactions according to the current protocol would be invalid in the proposed protocol and vice versa.
