```
LIP: 0037
Title: Use message tags and chain identifiers for signatures
Author: Andreas Kendziorra <andreas.kendziorra@lightcurve.io>
Discussions-To: https://research.lisk.com/t/use-message-tags-and-chain-identifiers-for-signatures/280
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 2021-04-07
Updated: 2023-01-30
Replaces: 0009
```

## Abstract

We introduce the concept of message tags for signatures. These message tags are prepended to the binary messages before being signed. A unique tag has to be used for each message type (transaction, block header, etc.), and in particular for each schema. This ensures that a signature for one message cannot be a valid signature for another message that serializes to the same binary message.

Moreover, we generalize the usage of the chain identifiers (called network identifier in previous LIPs), which are currently used for transaction and block header signatures, to arbitrary signatures. This will prevent replay attacks for arbitrary messages.

## Copyright

This LIP is licensed under the [Creative Commons Zero 1.0 Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

## Motivation

We want to avoid (1) replay attacks and (2) the re-usage of a signature for a different message of a different type.

Case (2) could happen if there are two messages that are of different types but are serialized to the same binary message. For example, consider a block header `bh` that is serialized to the binary message `bm`. If the binary message `bm` can be deserialized against a transaction schema to a transaction `tx`, then a signature of `bh` would also be a valid signature of `tx` for the generator public key of `bh`. Note that for several reasons it is very unlikely that a concrete instance of this example passes block validation for `bh` and transaction validation for `tx`. For instance, the current schemas do not allow that`bh.generatorPublicKey` and `tx.senderPublicKey` are encoded in the same position of the binary message.

Nevertheless, it is highly desirable to prevent such re-usage cases in general. In particular for new data structures that require a signature introduced by some future protocol enhancements.

Replay attacks for transactions and blocks, i.e. replaying transactions or blocks on other chains, are already addressed by [LIP 0009](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0009.md) and [LIP 0024](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0024.md#update-to-the-block-header-signing-procedure) respectively. However, replay attacks should be prevented for any kind of data structure for the same reason as above.

## Rationale

### Message Tags

Prepending a tag to a binary message before signing, where the tag is specific to the type of the message, prevents the signature re-usage in general. Consider again the blockheader `bh` and the transaction `tx` that are serialized to the same binary message `bm`. When the tag `"LSK_BH_"` is used for block header signatures and the tag `"LSK_TX_"` for transaction signatures, then the signatures for `bh` and `tx` are computed by signing the messages `"LSK_BH_" + bm` and `"LSK_TX_" + bm` respectively. Hence, the signature of `bh` cannot be a valid signature for `tx` and vice versa (assuming no collisions in the signing function).

Note that any updates to the serialization specification of a message type must be accompanied by introducing a new tag. For example, when the [transaction schema](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0028.md#transactionschema-schema) is updated, a new tag like `"LSK_TX:V2_"` must be defined and used.

### Chain Identifiers

Chain identifiers for transaction signatures and block signatures were already introduced in [LIP 0009](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0009.md#specification) and [LIP 0024](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0024.md#update-to-the-block-header-signing-procedure) (as network identifiers) to prevent replay attacks on other chains. Here, we specify how to use a chain identifier for any kind of message to prevent replay attacks on other chains in general.
These specifications supersede the specifications given in [LIP 0009][lip-0009].

Chain identifiers are 4-byte values that follow a specific format: the first byte is used to identify the network in which the chain is running (either the mainnet, official testnet, or any other test network). The other 3 bytes identify the chain within the network. We include the network-specific prefix explicitly to ensure that a chain does not use the same chain identifier in the test network as in the mainnet.

The first bit of the chain-identifier prefix is always set to `0`. Thus, we have a total of `128` available network IDs. This is done to prevent the overflow of the max size of `uint32` for hardened paths for [Ed25519 keys derivation](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0066.md#ed25519-key-derivation).

Using 4 bytes instead of 32 bytes as in [LIP 0009][lip-0009] has the advantage that users can easily verify that they are signing a transaction for the correct blockchain. Furthermore, the chain identifier can be directly set by the blockchain creator, which is more convenient than generating a random 32-byte value.

## Specification

### Notation and Constants

| Name | Type | Value | Description |
|------|------|-------|-------------|
| `CHAIN_ID_LENGTH` | `uint32` | 4 | Length of chain IDs in bytes. |
| `OWN_CHAIN_ID` | `ChainID` | set in configuration | The chain ID of the chain under consideration, see [below](#own-chain-id). |

### Type Definitions

| Name | Type | Validation | Description |
|------|------|------------|-------------|
| `ChainID` | `bytes` | Must be of length `CHAIN_ID_LENGTH`. | ID of a chain. |

### Message Tags

Every binary message must be tagged before being signed. This is done as specified by the function `tagMessage` in the pseudo code below: A specific ASCII-encoded tag and a chain identifier are prepended to the message.

```python
def tagMessage(tag: bytes, chainID: bytes, message: bytes) -> bytes:
    return tag + chainID + message
```

The tag is chosen depending on the message type. Moreover, different serialization methods for the same message type require different tags. The following table defines the tags currently needed.

| Name | Type | Value | Description |
|------|------|-------|-------------|
| `MESSAGE_TAG_TRANSACTION` | `bytes` | "LSK_TX_" as ASCII-encoded literal | Message tag for signing transaction with serialization specified in [LIP "Define New Transaction Schema"](https://research.lisk.com/t/define-new-transaction-schema/348/15). |
| `MESSAGE_TAG_BLOCK_HEADER` | `bytes` | "LSK_BH_" as ASCII-encoded literal | Message tag for signing block headers with serialization specified in [LIP 0055](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0055.md#unsigned-block-header-json-schema). |
| `MESSAGE_TAG_MULTISIG_REG` | `bytes` | "LSK_RMS_" as ASCII-encoded literal | Message tag for the signatures contained in the [register multisignature command](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0041.md#RegisterMultisignature). |
| `MESSAGE_TAG_CHAIN_REG_MESSAGE` | `bytes` | "LSK_CHAIN_REGISTRATION_" as ASCII-encoded literal | Message tag for the signatures contained in the [chain registration message](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0043.md). |
| `MESSAGE_TAG_POA` | `bytes` | "LSK_POA_" as ASCII-encoded literal | Message tag for the signatures contained in the [update authority command](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0047.md#authority-registration-command). |
| `MESSAGE_TAG_CERTIFICATE ` | `bytes` | "LSK_CE_" as ASCII-encoded literal | Message tag for signing certficates with serialization specified in [LIP 0061](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0061.md#signcertificate). |


#### Creating New Tags

When a new tag is required in the future, the format:

    "LSK_" + TAG + "_"

has to be used where:

- Strings in double quotes are ASCII-encoded literals.
- TAG is a unique string indicating the scheme and, optionally, additional information, e.g., to specify a version number as shown [above](#message-tags). TAG must contain only ASCII characters between 0x21 and 0x7e (inclusive), except that it must not contain underscore (0x5f).

### Chain Identifiers

Chain identifiers are 4-byte values. The first byte is set to `CHAIN_ID_PREFIX_MAINNET` for chains running in the mainnet network and to `CHAIN_ID_PREFIX_TESTNET` for chains running in the testnet network. The first bit of the chain-identifier prefix is always set to `0`. The other 3 bytes must be chosen uniquely for the respective blockchain, i.e., no other blockchain created with the Lisk SDK should use the same 3 bytes.

The following table defines the chain-identifiers prefixes currently specified.

| Name | Type | Value | Description |
|------|------|-------|-------------|
| `CHAIN_ID_PREFIX_MAINNET` | bytes | 0x00 | Chain-identifier prefix for mainnet blockchains. |
| `CHAIN_ID_PREFIX_TESTNET` | bytes | 0x01 | Chain-identifier prefix for testnet blockchains. |

#### Own Chain ID

The chain ID of a chain is denoted by the constant `OWN_CHAIN_ID` which is defined as part of the configuration of the chain. We assume this constant is globally available in the engine and application.

#### Mainchain Chain ID

For a given network, the chain ID of the mainchain always has the last 3 bytes set to 0.
Hence, given any chain ID in a network, the chain ID of the mainchain can be easily obtained by keeping the chain-identifier prefix and setting all other bytes to 0.
We define the following utility function to easily obtain the chain ID of the mainchain.

```python
def getMainchainID() -> ChainID:
    return OWN_CHAIN_ID[0:1] +  b'\0'*3
```

### Signing and Verifying with Ed25519

Let [`Sign`](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8032#section-5.1.6) and [`Verify`](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8032#section-5.1.7) be the signing and verifying functions of Ed25519 as specified in [RFC 8032](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8032). Then the signature for a binary message `m` and a secret key `sk` is generated by `signEd25519(sk, tag, chainID, m)` as defined below. `tag` must be the correct message tag for `m` and `chainID` the correct chain identifier for the chain. The resulting signature `sig` in combination with the message `m` and the matching public key `pk` is verified by `verifyEd25519(pk, tag, chainID, m, sig)`.

```python
def signEd25519(sk: bytes, tag: bytes, chainID: bytes, m: bytes) -> bytes:
    taggedMessage = tagMessage(tag, chainID, m)
    return Sign(sk, taggedMessage)
```

```python
def verifyEd25519(pk: bytes, tag: bytes, chainID: bytes, m: bytes, sig: bytes) -> bool:
    taggedMessage = tagMessage(tag, chainID, msg)
    return Verify(pk, taggedMessage, sig)
```

## Backwards Compatibility

Due to adding message tags to transaction and block signatures, the proposed signature scheme is incompatible with the current one and implies a hard fork.

## Appendix

### Examples

TBA

[lip-0009]: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0009.md
